https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2025_Romanian_presidential_election	Ilie Bolojan (acting) PNL Nicușor Dan Independent Presidential elections were held in Romania on 4 May 2025, with a second round on 18 May 2025. Nicușor Dan and George Simion were the two candidates who advanced to the second round. Dan's term as the seventh president of Romania began on 26 May. The election was scheduled in January 2025 following the annulment of the 2024 presidential election citing alleged Russian meddling in favour of first-round winner Călin Georgescu. The campaign was characterised by political instability and a series of protests against the annulment. On 7 March, Georgescu was barred from running, pending several criminal investigations, with the leader of the AUR party Simion announcing his candidacy in Georgescu's place. Simion, who won 40.96% of the vote in the first round, faced Dan, who garnered 20.99% of the vote, in the second round that was held on 18 May 2025. Dan won with 53.6% against Simion's 46.4%. On 20 May, having previously conceded the election and congratulated Dan on his victory, Simion stated that he had formally filed a contest of the results with the Romanian Constitutional Court, alleging mass voter fraud. Simion's request for the annulment of the election was rejected by the Court two days later, with Dan's presidency beginning on 26 May. On 6 December 2024, the 2024 presidential election, was annulled by the Constitutional Court of Romania, 48 hours before the second round was to be held, citing alleged Russian intervention on behalf of independent candidate, Călin Georgescu, who took a shock lead in the first round with 23%. CSAT said the campaign was "identical" to the online campaign launched by Russia before its invasion of Ukraine. On 20 December, an investigation was published showing that PNL had seemingly paid for one of the TikTok campaigns. PNL interim president Ilie Bolojan had stated however that the campaign was altered illegally to favor Georgescu, yet had not blamed the company they worked with for the alteration. After the parliamentary election, the second Ciolacu cabinet was formed as a minority coalition between PSD, PNL, UDMR and with confidence and supply from minority parties on 23 December 2024. Furthermore, Ilie Bolojan became President of the Senate of Romania and Ciprian-Constantin Șerban became the President of the Chamber of Deputies of Romania. The cabinet passed with a seven-vote majority and became official. Opposition leaders (most prominently George Simion and POT Leader Anamaria Gavrilă) called the cabinet illegitimate and for the resignation of incumbent president Klaus Iohannis. Following the annulment of the 2024 presidential election in December, Iohannis was allowed to stay on as president by the Constitutional Court until his successor could be sworn in. However, on 10 February, following an attempt by members of parliament to impeach him, Iohannis announced that he would resign on 12 February. Senate president Ilie Bolojan assumed the role of acting president until the elections. On 26 February 2025, Georgescu was stopped by police in traffic, while allegedly on his way to register for the election. He was charged with six offenses, including incitement to actions against the constitutional order, and support of fascist groups. Preemptive measures have been imposed, including judiciary control, and a 60-day ban on posting xenophobic and antisemitic materials to social networks (although such actions are already illegal in Romania). The police claimed to have found ten million U.S. dollars buried inside his bodyguard's house along with plane tickets to Moscow. On 7 March, Georgescu filed his candidacy to the Central Electoral Bureau, being rejected two days later which led to new protests. Consequently, George Simion arrived to the Central Electoral Bureau on 14 March accompanied by former Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki to file his candidacy after collecting 604,000 signatures, above the minimum requirement of 200,000. The CEB approved his candidacy on the following day, which was also the deadline for candidates to register, with Simion stating "We passed the BEC, now let's see if we pass the CCR and return to democracy". The CCR validated his candidacy one day later as well as the ones of Nicușor Dan and Victor Ponta. The date of the first round had initially been publicly speculated by news media as 23 March 2025, with the runoff two weeks later (6 April 2025). In early January, these dates became obsolete, as the law for electing the president of Romania requires a minimum of 75 days between the election day and the day the election is called. On 8 January, the coalition fixed the dates of the election. The first round was scheduled to be held on 4 May 2025 with the second round two weeks later (18 May 2025). The Central Electoral Bureau (BEC) was constituted on 21 February 2025. The deadline for registering electoral alliances at the BEC was on 23 February 2025. By that deadline, only one electoral alliance was registered, between the governing PSD, PNL, and UDMR, called the Romania Forward Electoral Alliance (Alianța Electorală România Înainte; A.Ro for short). Persons who wished to run for the office could begin gathering the support signatures (a minimum of 200,000) after 23 February. The deadline for registering the candidacy at the BEC was 15 March 2025, at 23:59:59. All candidatures validated by the BEC had to pass the scrutiny of the Constitutional Court of Romania. On 19 March, Gavrilă withdrew her candidacy for president, endorsing Simion. A final list of all 11 candidates was released on the following day. On 22 March, a random draw took place, placing Simion on the first position on the ballot and Nicușor Dan on the last. The following is a list of people that have filed a candidacy at the Central Electoral Bureau and were rejected for not complying the legal requirements to be allowed to run. The debates started on 8 April 2025, four days after the start of the campaign. The following is a table of participating candidates in each debate: Furthermore, in a poll among Moldovans with Romanian citizenship, 15.4% stated they would vote for Dan, 11.5% for Lasconi, 7.2% for Antonescu, 3.8% for Simion, 1.8% for Ponta and 0.8% for other candidates. 37.6% stated they were undecided, 18% that they would not vote and 3.9% did not answer. The poll was conducted by iData in April, with a sample of 1,027. According to iData, 500,000–550,000 Romanian citizens with the right to vote in the election lived in Moldova at the time. As per Romanian law, citizens could vote at the designated polling station inside the municipality, town or commune where they reside or at any other station outside of said jurisdiction, on a supplementary list. The counting process was recorded. Fifty-three Romanian politically non-affiliated organisations were accredited by the Permanent Electoral Authority to observe the election process. The AEP additionally approved access for 87 foreign journalists from outlets such as Sky News, Associated Press, Reuters, France 24 and the BBC as well as 159 representatives of the following organisations: Results were updated in real time on the Permanent Electoral Authority website with information from the 19,943 polling stations. There were no major incidents reported by observers during voting hours or the counting process. Statements of preliminary conclusions from the Parliamentary Assembly of the OSCE mention that "[t]he voting process was evaluated positively, with observers finding the process to be conducted in an efficient, transparent, and professional manner", while also noting the presence of online disinformation and media bias during the campaign. FEC member Trey Trainor praised the election process he observed, stating that: "Every vote was cast using a paper ballot, and the entire ballot-counting process was not only done in the presence of poll watchers from every political party but also recorded on video to guarantee transparency. There were no delays in reporting results. In fact, the entire country completed its electoral count within hours of polls closing — a testament to both the simplicity and the integrity of the process." Following the results, Prime Minister Marcel Ciolacu announced that PSD would leave A.Ro, and he resigned from the position of prime minister, which resulted in the collapse of the coalition. However, he continued to serve as the PSD leader. Lasconi got significantly less votes than in the 2024 elections, scoring only 2.68% of the vote. Subsequently, the next day after the elections, she announced she would step down as president of the Save Romania Union. Simion's victory in the first round also had significant economic implications, with the Bucharest Stock Exchange experiencing substantial losses and the National Bank of Romania investing over 2 billion euros in stabilising the leu and preventing depreciation. Former Romanian president Traian Băsescu criticised the Romanian diaspora for Simion's victory among its voters. He called the attitude of the majority of the diaspora "dishonest", stating that: "They live in the West and say: come on, you who live at home, come on, go to daddy Putin, go to Putin!". Simion was congratulated on his first-round win by Mateusz Morawiecki, former Polish prime minister and current president of the European Conservatives and Reformists, Italy's Deputy Prime Minister Matteo Salvini and French MEP Marion Maréchal. According to Moldovan analyst Ion Tăbîrță, past actions and declarations by Simion indicated an unpredictable and potentially damaging approach to Moldova–Romania relations. According to him, with Simion's election, Moldova could lose Romania's support, including its path to European integration. He added that Romania would lose its role as Moldova's "defender" in the eyes of the European Union, as it would no longer have the same image within the bloc. According to Moldovan analyst Mihaela Sirețanu, relations between the two countries could become tense, also considering Simion's entry ban on Moldova, which was to be in force until 2028. Both Tăbîrță and Sirețanu agreed that Dan's victory would be more favourable for Moldova and its relationship with Romania. BBC's Central Europe Correspondent Nick Thorpe reported that many voters who backed Georgescu in the annulled election are thought to have switched their allegiance to Simion and that the two voted together. He further added in the second round, Simion could also attract voters who backed fourth-placed former Prime Minister Victor Ponta, a retired Social Democrat who adopted a "Romania First" campaign. On the day of the second round, Andrei Țărnea, spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Romania, denounced Russian interference during the election. He stated that a viral fake news campaign on Telegram and other social media was seeking to influence the electoral process, something which was expected as he stated, with the Romanian authorities having proved these news false according to him. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated this situation was alarming because "it appears to have been created with the aim of undermining citizens' confidence in democratic institutions and processes". Furthermore, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Romania stated that a clip had been distributed on TikTok claiming that French troops in Romania, stationed at NATO's Cincu Training Center, were secretly wearing Romanian Gendarmerie uniforms to intervene on Romania's internal affairs, which the ministry stated was false and "pure disinformation". With a final voter turnout of 64.72% (which translates to 11,641,544 votes), the run-off winner was certified on 18 May by the Central Electoral Bureau to be Dan, with 6,168,642 votes. Simion had prematurely declared victory on Facebook with a post reading: "I won!!! I am the new President of Romania and I am giving back the power to the Romanians!" He later conceded the election, stating "I would like to congratulate my opponent, Nicușor Dan. He won the election, it was the will of the Romanian people". Two days later, Simion demanded the annulment of the election, citing "external influence by state and non-state actors" as grounds for annulment, drawing parallels to the court's previous annulment of the December 2024 election over alleged Russian interference, referring to the election as a "farce". On May 22, the Constitutional Court rejected Simion's request and upheld the initial results, thus validating Dan's election. Dan was sworn-in on 26 May in front of the Romanian Parliament. On 21 May, seven out of the 21 deputies and five out of the seven senators of the right-wing populist Party of Young People left the party, bringing the parliamentary group in the Senate below the minimum threshold of members and causing its dissolution. Several leaders from across Europe congratulated Dan on his election; they included French president Emmanuel Macron, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy, Moldovan president Maia Sandu, Polish prime minister Donald Tusk, and European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen. Russian presidential spokesperson Dmitry Peskov called the election results "strange, to say the least", and said Dan had won "in the absence of the favorite", referring to Georgescu. The French intelligence agency DGSE denied claims by George Simion and Telegram founder Pavel Durov that it had interfered with the election. Analysts attributed Dan's unexpected victory in the second round to the higher voter turnout. Dan defeated Simion particularly among urban voters, women and ethnic minorities. The New York Times columnist Andrew Higgins also opined that Dan's victory indicated that voters "wanted a middle path between bitterly polarized political camps", while the Atlantic Council argued that Dan benefited from not being associated with the ruling government, and that "Romanians have voted for Europe and democracy, not nationalism, but they also seem to want change". Political analyst and AUR senate leader Petrișor Peiu attributed the result to Dan's strong mobilisation efforts as well as "less inspired" decisions by the AUR. Debates may be broadcast on radio, television, or the internet. Candidates may show up in person or participate in the debate via telephone or video streaming for the entire debate time. Candidates who left the debate before 10% of the debate time elapsed (after a few words or several minutes) are considered absentees and their leaving is noted as such. In this particular situation (if it will occur), the debate is considered a valid one, because at least two candidates were present at its beginning. Candidates who left before the debate's ending are considered present, with their particular situation noted as such. Re-runs or syndication are not counted as different debates.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romania	Romania is a country located at the crossroads of Central, Eastern and Southeast Europe. It borders Ukraine to the north and east, Hungary to the west, Serbia to the southwest, Bulgaria to the south, Moldova to the east, and the Black Sea to the southeast. It has a mainly continental climate, and an area of 238,397 km (92,046 sq mi) with a population of 19 million people. Romania is the twelfth-largest country in Europe and the sixth-most populous member state of the European Union. Europe's second-longest river, the Danube, empties into the Danube Delta in the southeast of the country. The Carpathian Mountains cross Romania from the north to the southwest and include Moldoveanu Peak, at an altitude of 2,544 m (8,346 ft). Bucharest is the country's largest urban area and financial centre. Other major urban areas include Cluj-Napoca, Timișoara, Iași, Constanța and Brașov. Settlement in the territory of modern Romania began in the Lower Paleolithic, later becoming the Dacian Kingdom before Roman conquest and Romanisation. The modern Romanian state formed in 1859 with the unification of Moldavia and Wallachia under Alexandru Ioan Cuza, becoming Kingdom of Romania in 1881 under Carol I. Romania gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877, formalised by the Treaty of Berlin. After World War I, Transylvania, Banat, Bukovina, and Bessarabia joined the Old Kingdom, forming Greater Romania, which reached its largest territorial extent. In 1940, under Axis pressure, Romania lost territories to Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Soviet Union. Following the 1944 Romanian coup d'état, Romania switched sides to join the Allies. After World War II, it regained Northern Transylvania through the Paris Peace Treaties. Under Soviet occupation, King Michael I was forced to abdicate, and Romania became a socialist republic and Warsaw Pact member. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition to liberal democracy and a market economy. Romania is a developing country with a high-income economy, classified as a middle power in international relations. It is a unitary republic with a multi-party system and a semi-presidential representative democracy. It is home to 11 UNESCO World Heritage Sites and has become an increasingly popular tourist destination, attracting 14 million foreign visitors in 2024. Romania is a net exporter of automotive and vehicle parts worldwide and has established a growing reputation as a technology centre, with some of the fastest internet speeds globally. Romania is a member of several international organisations, including the European Union, NATO, and the BSEC. Romania derives from the local name for Romanian (Romanian: român), which in turn derives from Latin romanus, meaning "Roman" or "of Rome". This ethnonym for Romanians is first attested in the 16th century by Italian humanists travelling in Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia. The oldest known surviving document written in Romanian that can be precisely dated, a 1521 letter known as the "Letter of Neacșu from Câmpulung", is notable for including the first documented occurrence of Romanian in a country name: Wallachia is mentioned as Țara Rumânească. It is believed that the tribes responsible for creating the Bronze Age culture on the territory of modern Romania belonged to the Indo-European group of Thracians. Strabo, in Geographica, notes that the Getae spoke the same language as the Thracians, and the Dacians the same language as the Getae. However, the earliest account of the Getae is attributed to Herodotus. The conquest of Dacia by the Romans led to the fusion of two cultures—the Daco-Romans became the ancestors of the Romanian people. After Dacia became a province of the Roman Empire, elements of Roman culture and civilisation—most notably Vulgar Latin, which laid the foundation for the development of the Romanian language—were introduced. Based on information from the inscription at Dionysupolis and the account of Iordanes, it is known that under the rule of Burebista, assisted by the great priest Deceneu, the first Geto-Dacian state was formed. In 44 BC, Burebista was assassinated by one of his servants. After his death, the Geto-Dacian state fragmented into four, and later five, kingdoms. The core of the state remained in the area of the Șureanu Mountains, where successive rulers such as Deceneu, Comosicus, and Coryllus held power. The centralised Dacian state reached the peak of its development under Decebalus. During this period, a series of conflicts with the Roman Empire continued, with part of the Dacian state being conquered in 106 AD by the Roman emperor Trajan. Between 271 and 275 AD, the Aurelian retreat took place. In the first millennium, waves of nomads swept across the territory of Romania: the Goths during the 3rd–4th centuries, the Huns in the 4th century, the Gepids in the 5th century, the Avars in the 6th century, the Slavs in the 7th century, the Magyars in the 9th century, the Pechenegs, the Cumans, the Uzes and the Alans during the 10th–12th centuries, and the Tatars in the 13th century. In 1054, a series of ecclesiastical differences and theological disputes between the Greek East and Latin West caused the Great Schism, eventually resulting in Romania adopting Orthodoxy. In the 13th century, the first bearers of the Slavic noble title Knyaz south of the Carpathian Mountains are attested. Later, in the context of the crystallisation of feudal relations, as a result of the creation of favourable internal and external conditions (the weakening of Hungarian pressure and the diminishing of Tatars domination), autonomous feudal states emerged south and east of the Carpathians – Wallachia in 1310, under Basarab I, and Moldova in 1359, under Bogdan I. Among the Romanian rulers who played a more important role can be mentioned: Alexander the Good, Stephen the Great, Petru Rareș, and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldova; Mircea the Elder, Vlad the Impaler, Michael the Brave, and Constantin Brâncoveanu in Wallachia; and John Hunyadi in Transylvania. Beginning in the late 15th century, the two principalities gradually came under the influence of the Ottoman Empire. Transylvania, which throughout the Middle Ages was part of the Kingdom of Hungary, governed by voivodes, became a self-governing principality and a vassal of the Ottoman Empire from 1526. At the turn of the 16th and 17th centuries, Michael the Brave for a very brief period ruled over a large part of the territory of present-day Romania. The Kingdom of Hungary collapsed, and the Ottomans occupied parts of Banat and Crișana in 1541. Transylvania and Maramureș, along with the rest of Banat and Crișana developed into a new state under Ottoman suzerainty, the Principality of Transylvania. The Reformation, initiated in Germany by Martin Luther in 1517, encouraged the rise of Protestantism and four denominations—Calvinism, Lutheranism, Unitarianism, and Roman Catholicism—were officially acknowledged in 1568. The Romanians' Orthodox faith remained only tolerated, although they made up more than one-third of the population, according to 17th-century estimates. The princes of Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia joined the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire in 1594. The Wallachian prince, Michael the Brave, united the three principalities under his rule in May 1600. The neighbouring powers forced him to abdicate in September, but he became a symbol of the unification of the Romanian lands in the 19th century. Although the rulers of the three principalities continued to pay tribute to the Ottomans, the most talented princes—Gabriel Bethlen of Transylvania, Matei Basarab of Wallachia, and Vasile Lupu of Moldavia—strengthened their autonomy. The united armies of the Holy League expelled the Ottoman troops from Central Europe between 1684 and 1699, and the Principality of Transylvania was integrated into the Habsburg monarchy. The Habsburgs supported the Catholic clergy and persuaded the Orthodox Romanian prelates to accept the union with the Roman Catholic Church in 1699. In the 18th century, Moldavia and Wallachia maintained their internal autonomy, but in 1711 and 1716, respectively, the period of the Phanariots began, with rulers appointed directly by the Porte from among the noble families of Greek origin in Constantinople. With the signing of the Ausgleich in 1867, Transylvania quickly lost its remaining political autonomy, being politically and administratively incorporated into the Kingdom of Hungary. The Church Union strengthened the Romanian intellectuals' devotion to their Roman heritage. The Orthodox Church was restored in Transylvania only after Orthodox monks stirred up revolts in 1744 and 1759. The organisation of the Transylvanian Military Frontier caused further disturbances, especially among the Székelys in 1764. Princes Dimitrie Cantemir of Moldavia and Constantin Brâncoveanu of Wallachia concluded alliances with the Habsburg Monarchy and Russia against the Ottomans, but they were dethroned in 1711 and 1714, respectively. The sultans lost confidence in the native princes and appointed Orthodox merchants from the Phanar district of Istanbul to rule Moldova and Wallachia. The Phanariot princes pursued oppressive fiscal policies and dissolved the army. The neighbouring powers took advantage of the situation: the Habsburg Monarchy annexed the northwestern part of Moldavia, or Bukovina, in 1775, and the Russian Empire seized the eastern half of Moldavia, or Bessarabia, in 1812. A census revealed that the Romanians were more numerous than any other ethnic group in Transylvania in 1733, but legislation continued to use contemptuous adjectives (such as "tolerated" and "admitted") when referring to them. The Uniate bishop, Inocențiu Micu-Klein who demanded recognition of the Romanians as the fourth privileged nation was forced into exile. Uniate and Orthodox clerics and laymen jointly signed a plea for the Transylvanian Romanians' emancipation in 1791, but the monarch and the local authorities refused to grant their requests. The Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca authorised the Russian ambassador in Istanbul to defend the autonomy of Moldavia and Wallachia (known as the Danubian Principalities) in 1774. Taking advantage of the Greek War of Independence, a Wallachian lesser nobleman, Tudor Vladimirescu, stirred up a revolt against the Ottomans in January 1821, but he was murdered in June by Phanariot Greeks. After a new Russo-Turkish War, the Treaty of Adrianople strengthened the autonomy of the Danubian Principalities in 1829, although it also acknowledged the sultan's right to confirm the election of the princes. Mihail Kogălniceanu, Nicolae Bălcescu and other leaders of the 1848 revolutions in Moldavia and Wallachia demanded the emancipation of the peasants and the union of the two principalities, but Russian and Ottoman troops crushed their revolt. The Wallachian revolutionists were the first to adopt the blue, yellow and red tricolour as the national flag. In Transylvania, most Romanians supported the imperial government against the Hungarian revolutionaries after the Diet passed a law concerning the union of Transylvania and Hungary. Bishop Andrei Șaguna proposed the unification of the Romanians of the Habsburg Monarchy in a separate duchy, but the central government refused to change the internal borders. The modern Romanian state was created through the unification of the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia, accepted as a federative structure by the Great Powers following the Paris Convention of 1858, and later cemented by the simultaneous election as ruler of both states of the unionist Alexandru Ioan Cuza. After carrying out numerous reforms that laid the foundations for the modernisation of the state, he was forced in 1866 by a broad coalition of the political parties of the time, also known as the "Monstrous coalition", to abdicate and leave the country. The union was at one time in peril, but the political leaders of the era succeeded in placing on the princely throne Carol I of Romania, who accepted the Constitution and took the oath on 10 May 1866. Eleven years later, on 10 May 1877, Romania proclaimed its independence—achieved on the battlefield—and in 1881, on the same day of the year, Carol was crowned as King of Romania. In 1913, Romania entered the Second Balkan War against Bulgaria, at the end of which it obtained Southern Dobruja. In 1914, King Carol I died, and his nephew, Ferdinand I, succeeded him on the throne. In 1916, Romania entered World War I on the side of the Entente Powers. Although the Romanian forces did not perform well militarily, by the end of the war the Austrian and Russian Empires had disintegrated; the National Assembly in Transylvania, and the Sfatul Țării in Bessarabia and Bukovina proclaimed their union with Romania, and King Ferdinand I and Queen Maria were crowned sovereign of all Romanians in Alba Iulia on 15 October 1922. The Treaty of Versailles recognised all the union proclamations in accordance with the right to self-determination established by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points. After having left the country and renounced his claim to the throne in 1925, Carol II returned in 1930 and usurped his son’s throne; influenced by his inner circle—referred to by historians as the "Royal Camarilla"—he gradually undermined the democratic system, and in 1938 he assumed dictatorial powers. Although he was pro-Western (especially Anglophile), Carol attempted to appease extreme centrifugal forces by appointing nationalist governments that adopted anti-Semitic measures, such as the Goga cabinet and the one led by the Orthodox Patriarch Miron Cristea. Following the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of 1939, in June 1940 Romania accepted the loss of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina and the Hertsa region in favour of the USSR (as stipulated in the Soviet ultimatum of 28 June 1940). Unaware of the details of the Soviet–German pact, Carol attempted to secure an alliance with Nazi Germany, and appointed Ion Gigurtu as President of the Council of Ministers, who declared that he would pursue a Nazi pro-Axis (Berlin–Rome) policy that was anti-Semitic and fascist-totalitarian in nature. Between 4 July and 4 September 1940, by accepting Hitler's arbitration over Transylvania (after Gigurtu declared on radio that Romania must make territorial sacrifices to justify its Nazi orientation and full adherence to the Berlin–Rome Axis), Romania ceded Northern Transylvania—including the city of Cluj—to Hungary. The vast territories in Transylvania ceded by Ion Gigurtu to Hungary contained important natural resources, including gold mines. Ion Gigurtu also initiated negotiations to cede 8,000 km of Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria, these negotiations were interrupted by Antonescu's unconditional acceptance of the territorial cession. In response to the chaotic withdrawal from Bessarabia, the territorial cessions, public discontent, and protests from political leaders, King Carol II suspended the 1938 Constitution of Romania and appointed General Ion Antonescu as Prime Minister. This measure, supported by the Iron Guard, demanded that the king abdicate in favour of his son, Mihai. Subsequently, Antonescu assumed dictatorial powers and became President of the Council of Ministers, self-titling himself as the "Leader" of the state. In 1941, as an ally of Nazi Germany, Romania entered World War II by declaring war on the Soviet Union. A shift in fortunes only became discernible after the defeat at Stalingrad and the subsequent change of the USSR from a defensive to an offensive posture. On 23 August 1944, with the Soviet army having been present in northern Moldova since March, King Mihai I forcibly removed Marshal Ion Antonescu from power, as he refused to sign an armistice with the Allies of World War II. Following Antonescu's outright refusal, King Mihai I ordered the dismissal and arrest of the marshal, and Romania switched sides to join the Allies. Less than three years after the Soviet occupation of Romania, in 1947, King Michael I was forced to abdicate and the People's Republic of Romania—a state of "popular democracy"—was proclaimed. The newly established communist regime, led by the Romanian Workers' Party, consolidated its power through a Stalinist-type policy aimed at suppressing any political opposition and transforming the economic and social structures of the old bourgeois regime. In the early 1960s, the Romanian government began asserting a certain degree of independence from the Soviet Union in its foreign policy, although it did not abandon its repressive policies (which it labeled "revolutionary conquests") in domestic affairs. In 1965, communist leader Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej died, ushering in a period of change in Romania. After a brief power struggle, Nicolae Ceaușescu emerged as the head of the communist party, becoming General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party in 1965, President of the State Council in 1967, and President of the Socialist Republic of Romania in 1974. Ceaușescu's rule from 1965 to 1989 grew increasingly authoritarian during the 1980s. In the context of the fall of communism throughout Eastern Europe during the revolutions of 1989, a protest in support of Reformed pastor László Tőkés that began in December 1989 in Timișoara quickly escalated into a national uprising against the communist regime, ultimately resulting in the execution of Ceaușescu and his wife Elena on 25 December 1989. An interim council composed of figures from civil society and former communist officials assumed control of the government, and Ion Iliescu became the provisional president of the country. The new government reversed many of the authoritarian communist policies and dismissed several leaders of the former regime, although still influenced by members of the former regime (the basis for the Golaniad, and Mineriads). In May 1990, the first free elections in Romania since 1937 elections were held, with Iliescu of the National Salvation Front winning the presidency with 85% of the vote. In 1992, he was reelected in the first election after the adoption of a permanent constitution via a referendum held the previous year. Illiescu lost the 1996 election to Emil Constantinescu, but returned to power in 2000. Traian Băsescu was elected president in 2004 and 2009, serving until 2014 at which point Klaus Iohannis succeeded him, being re-elected in 2019 and serving until 2025. During these years several events occurred. In 2009, the country was bailed out by the International Monetary Fund as result of the Great Recession in Europe following the 2008 financial crisis. The post-1989 period has been characterised by the privatisation and closure of several former industrial and economic enterprises from the communist period were closed, while corruption has been a major issue in contemporary politics. A National Anticorruption Directorate was formed in the country in 2002. During the 2000s, Romania had one of the highest economic growth rates in Europe and has been referred at times as "the Tiger of Eastern Europe". This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced domestic poverty and established a functional democratic state. However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late 2000s' recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and a budget deficit in 2009. This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund. Worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012. Since 2014, Romania launched an anti-corruption effort that led to the prosecution of medium- and high-level political, judicial and administrative offenses by the National Anticorruption Directorate. In 2015, massive anti-corruption protests which developed in the wake of the Colectiv nightclub fire led to the resignation of prime minister Victor Ponta. During 2017–2019, in response to measures which were perceived to weaken the fight against corruption, some of the biggest post-1989 protests took place in Romania, with over 500,000 people protesting nationwide. The 2021 Romanian political crisis led to the outsting of Florin Cîțu's incumbent government. The Ciucă Cabinet then took power, with Romania since having experienced a shift towards authoritarianism and illiberalism, as well as an increased corruption. Around this time, Romania was also hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. In the 2024 presidential election, Independent candidate Călin Georgescu achieved a surprise win in the first round. However, the Constitutional Court annulled the election results, citing Russian meddling. The cancellation led to far-right protests, criticism by the Trump administration, and Ilie Bolojan becoming acting president in February 2025 as Iohannis resigned to political pressure. Romania is the largest country in Southeastern Europe and the twelfth-largest in Europe, having an area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi). It lies between latitudes 43° and 49° N and longitudes 20° and 30° E. The terrain is distributed roughly equally between mountains, hills, and plains. The Carpathian Mountains dominate the centre of Romania, with 14 mountain ranges reaching above 2,000 m or 6,600 ft—the highest is Moldoveanu Peak at 2,544 m or 8,346 ft. They are surrounded by the Moldavian and Transylvanian plateaus, the Pannonian Plain and the Wallachian plains. Romania is home to six terrestrial ecoregions: Balkan mixed forests, Central European mixed forests, East European forest steppe, Pannonian mixed forests, Carpathian montane conifer forests, and Pontic steppe. Natural and semi-natural ecosystems cover about 47% of the country's land area. There are almost 10,000 km (3,900 sq mi) (about 5% of the total area) of protected areas in Romania covering 13 national parks and three biosphere reserves. The Danube river forms a large part of the border with Serbia and Bulgaria, and flows into the Black Sea, forming the Danube Delta, which is the second-largest and best-preserved delta in Europe, and a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site. At 5,800 km (2,200 sq mi), the Danube Delta is the largest continuous marshland in Europe, and supports 1,688 different plant species alone. Romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe, covering almost 27% of its territory. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.95/10, ranking it 90th globally out of 172 countries. Some 3,700 plant species have been identified in the country, from which to date 23 have been declared natural monuments, 74 extinct, 39 endangered, 171 vulnerable, and 1,253 rare. The fauna of Romania consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate, with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians, including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears and 20% of its wolves. Owing to its distance from open sea and its position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is continental, with four distinct seasons. The average annual temperature is 11 °C (52 °F) in the south and 8 °C (46 °F) in the north. In summer, average maximum temperatures in Bucharest rise to 28 °C (82 °F), and temperatures over 35 °C (95 °F) are fairly common in the lower-lying areas of the country. In winter, the average maximum temperature is below 2 °C (36 °F). Precipitation is average, with over 750 mm (30 in) per year only on the highest western mountains, while around Bucharest it drops to approximately 570 mm (22 in). There are some regional differences: in western sections, such as Banat, the climate is milder and has some Mediterranean influences; the eastern part of the country has a more pronounced continental climate. In Dobruja, the Black Sea also exerts an influence over the region's climate. Romania is a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic with a structured system of governance and an active civil society. The President, elected by popular vote, serves as the head of state, representing the country in international affairs, safeguarding constitutional order, and acting as supreme commander of the Romanian Armed Forces. The Prime Minister, appointed by the President and confirmed by the Parliament, acts as the head of government, responsible for overseeing the executive branch, implementing domestic and foreign policies, and managing public administration. Legislative authority is vested in a bicameral Parliament, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, whose members are elected through a proportional representation system. The judiciary operates independently, with the High Court of Cassation and Justice as the highest court of appeal. Romania has a democratic, multi-party system, with legislative power vested in the government and the two chambers of the Parliament, more specifically the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality. The justice system is independent of the other branches of government and is made up of a hierarchical system of courts with the High Court of Cassation and Justice being the supreme court of Romania. There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts. The Romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the French model, is based on civil law and is inquisitorial in nature. The Constitutional Court (Curtea Constituțională) is responsible for judging the compliance of laws and other state regulations with the constitution, which is the fundamental law of the country and can be amended only through a public referendum. Romania's 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Romania as a "hybrid regime" in 2024. Since December 1989, Romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the West in general, more specifically with the United States and the EU, albeit with limited relations involving the Russian Federation. It joined NATO on 29 March 2004, the EU on 1 January 2007, while it joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1972, and is a founding member of the World Trade Organization. Romania is recognised as a middle power for its military capabilities, as well as its active diplomatic engagement on the global stage. In the past, recent governments have stated that one of their goals is to strengthen ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine, and Georgia) and better integration with the rest of the West. Romania has also made clear since the late 1990s that it supports NATO and EU membership for the democratic former Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus. Romania applied to join to the Schengen Area in 2007, acquiring full membership in 2025 along with Bulgaria. In December 2005, President Traian Băsescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country. In 2009, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton referred to Romania as "one of the most trustworthy and respectable" US allies". However, by 2025, relations had worsen, with US vice president JD Vance in February scolding "flimsy suspicions" and "enormous pressure from its continental neighbours" for causing the annulment of the 2024 Romanian presidential election in which Călin Georgescu won the first round. Relations with Moldova are a special case given that the two countries share the same language and a common history. A movement for unification of Moldova and Romania appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania. After the 2009 protests in Moldova and the subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably. The Romanian Armed Forces consist of land, air, and naval forces led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of National Defence, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime. The Armed Forces consist of approximately 55,000 reservists and 71,500 active military personnel—35,800 for land, 10,700 for air, 6,600 for naval forces, and 16,500 in other fields. Total defence spending in 2023 accounted for 2.44% of total national GDP, or approximately US$8.48 billion, with a total of $9 billion intended to be spent until 2026 for modernisation and acquisition of new equipment. Conscription stopped in 2007, when Romania switched to a volunteer army. The Air Force operates F-16AM/BM MLU fighters, C-27J Spartan and C-130 Hercules transport aircraft, as well as IAR 330 and IAR 316 helicopters. A procurement programme for F-35 fifth-generation fighters is also currently being carried out. The Naval Forces operate three frigates, of which two are Type 22 frigates acquired from the British Royal Navy, as well as four corvettes. The River Flotilla operates Mihail Kogălniceanu and Smârdan-class river monitors. Romania contributed troops to the international coalition in Afghanistan beginning in 2002, with a peak deployment of 1,600 troops in 2010 (which was the 4th largest contribution according to the US). Its combat mission in the country concluded in 2014. Romanian troops participated in the occupation of Iraq, reaching a peak of 730 soldiers before being slowly drawn down to 350 soldiers. Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24 July 2009, among the last countries to do so. The frigate the Regele Ferdinand participated in the 2011 military intervention in Libya. In December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield. The Aegis Ashore missile system based at Deveslu became operational in 2016. In 2024, construction work started on expanding the Mihail Kogălniceanu Air Base (RoAF 57th Air Base). The air base is set to become the largest NATO base in Europe after the implementation of a project spanning 20 years. Romania is divided into 41 counties (județe) and the municipality of Bucharest. Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level. The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party. Each county is subdivided further into cities and communes, which have their own mayor and local council. There are a total of 320 cities and 2,861 communes in Romania. A total of 103 of the larger cities have municipality status, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs. The municipality of Bucharest is a special case, as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county. It is further divided into six sectors and has a prefect, a general mayor (primar general), and a general city council. The NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) level divisions of the EU reflect Romania's administrative-territorial structure and correspond to the 41 counties plus Bucharest. The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions. The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2 (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity and are used instead for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes. In 2024, Romania has a GDP (PPP) of around $894 billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $47,203. According to the World Bank, Romania is a high-income economy. According to Eurostat, Romania's GDP per capita (PPS) was 77% of the EU average (100%) in 2022, an increase from 44% in 2007 (the year of Romania's accession to the EU), making Romania one of the fastest growing economies in the EU. The Bucharest Stock Exchange (BVB) is the stock exchange of Romania, located in Bucharest. In 2024, the BVB boasted a $74 billion market capitalisation and a trading volume of $7.2 billion. As of 2024, 86 companies were listed on the exchange. In September 2020, FTSE Russell upgraded the BVB from a Frontier market to a Secondary Emerging Market. After 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform. From 2000 onwards, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterised by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation. In 2006, according to the Romanian Statistics Office, GDP growth in real terms was recorded at 7.7%, one of the highest rates in Europe. However, the Great Recession forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF €20 billion bailout programme. According to The World Bank, GDP per capita in purchasing power parity grew from $13,703 in 2007 to $47,903 in 2023. Romania's main exports are vehicles, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers). Trade is mostly centred on the member states of the EU, with Germany, Italy and France being the country's single largest trading partners. In 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16% for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the EU. The economy is based predominantly on services, which account for 56.2% of the country's total GDP as of 2017, with industry and agriculture accounting for 30% and 4.4% respectively. Approximately 25.8% of the Romanian workforce is employed in agriculture, one of the highest rates in Europe. Romania has attracted increasing amounts of foreign investment following the end of Communism, with the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) in Romania rising to €83.8 billion in June 2019. Romania's FDI outward stock (an external or foreign business either investing in or purchasing the stock of a local economy) amounted to $745 million in December 2018, the lowest value among the 28 EU member states. Since 1867 the official currency has been the Romanian leu ("lion") and following a denomination in 2005. After joining the EU in 2007, Romania plans to adopt the euro in 2029. According to the Romania's National Institute of Statistics (INS), Romania's total road network was estimated in 2015 at 86,080 kilometres (53,488 mi). The World Bank estimates the railway network at 22,298 kilometres (13,855 mi) of track, the fourth-largest railway network in Europe. Romania's rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989 and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004, but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatisation of lines, accounting for 45% of all passenger and freight movements in the country. Bucharest Metro, the only underground railway system, was opened in 1979 and measures 80.01 km (49.72 mi) with an average ridership in 2021 of 720,000 passengers during the workweek in the country. There are sixteen international commercial airports in service today. Over 12.8 million passengers flew through Bucharest's Henri Coandă International Airport in 2017. Romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 52nd worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy. Around a third of the produced energy comes from renewable sources, mostly as hydroelectric power. It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade. With one of the largest reserves of crude oil and shale gas in Europe it is among the most energy-independent countries in the EU, and is looking to expand its nuclear power plant at Cernavodă further. There were almost 18.3 million connections to the Internet in June 2014. According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked fifth in the world, and according to The Independent, it ranks number one in Europe at Internet speeds, with Timișoara ranked among the highest in the world. Tourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5% of GDP. The number of tourists has been rising steadily, reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016, according to the Worldbank. Tourism in Romania attracted €400 million in investments in 2005. More than 60% of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries. The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009. Most popular skiing resorts are along the Valea Prahovei and in Poiana Brașov. Castles, fortifications, or strongholds as well as preserved medieval Transylvanian cities or towns such as Cluj-Napoca, Sibiu, Brașov, Alba Iulia, Baia Mare, Bistrița, Mediaș, Cisnădie, Sebeș, or Sighișoara also attract a large number of tourists. Bran Castle, near Brașov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often (falsely) advertised as being Dracula's Castle. Other attractions include the Danube Delta or the Sculptural Ensemble of Constantin Brâncuși at Târgu Jiu. Rural tourism, focusing on getting visitors acquainted with local folklore and customs, has become an important alternative, and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the painted churches of northern Moldavia, and the wooden churches of Maramureș, or the villages with fortified churches in Transylvania. The Via Transilvanica long-distance hiking and cycling trail, which crosses 10 counties in the Transylvania, Banat and Bukovina regions of the country further promotes rural slow tourism. In 2014, Romania had 32,500 companies active in the hotel and restaurant industry, with a total turnover of €2.6 billion. More than 1.9 million foreign tourists visited Romania in 2014, 12% more than in 2013. According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77% came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy, and France), 12% from Asia, and less than 7% from North America. Historically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields. In the history of flight, Traian Vuia built the first aeroplane to take off under its own power and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coandă discovered the Coandă effect of fluidics. Victor Babeș discovered more than 50 types of bacteria; biologist Nicolae Paulescu developed an extract of the pancreas and showed that it lowers blood sugar in diabetic dogs, thus being significant in the history of insulin; while Emil Palade received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to cell biology. Lazăr Edeleanu was the first chemist to synthesise amphetamine, and he also invented the procedure of separating valuable petroleum components with selective solvents. During the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including: corruption, low funding, and a considerable brain drain. In recent years, Romania has ranked the lowest or second-lowest in the EU by research and development spending as a percentage of GDP, standing at roughly 0.5% in 2016 and 2017, substantially below the EU average of just over 2%. The country joined the European Space Agency (ESA) in 2011, and CERN in 2016. In 2018, however, Romania lost its voting rights in the ESA due to a failure to pay €56.8 million in membership contributions to the agency. In the early 2010s, the situation for science in Romania was characterised as "rapidly improving" albeit from a low base. In January 2011, Parliament passed a law that enforces "strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review". Romania was ranked 48th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. The nuclear physics facility of the EU's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania. In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guiana. Starting in December 2014, Romania became a co-owner of the International Space Station. According to the 2021 Romanian census, Romania's population was 19,053,815. Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to decline gradually as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate. According to the 2021 Romanian census, Romanians made up 89.33% of the population, Hungarians 6.05% and the Roma 3.44% of the population, but many ethnicities are not recorded, as they do not have ID cards. International sources give higher figures for Roma than the official census. According to the Council of Europe, the Roma makes up 8.32% of the population. Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna. Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs. In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans living in Romania, but only about 36,000 remained in the country to this day. As of 2009, there were also approximately 133,000 immigrants living in Romania, primarily from Moldova and China. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2018 was estimated at 1.36 children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and one of the lowest in the world, it remains considerably below the high of 5.82 children born per woman in 1912. In 2014, 31.2% of births were to unmarried women. The birth rate (9.49‰, 2012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84‰, 2012), resulting in a shrinking (−0.26% per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 41.6 years, 2018), one of the oldest populations in the world, with approximately 16.8% of total population aged 65 years and over. The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 74.92 years (71.46 years male, 78.59 years female). The number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at 12 million. After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, a significant number of Romanians emigrated to other European countries, North America or Australia. For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad. The official language is Romanian, a Romance language (the most widely spoken of the Eastern Romance branch), which presents a consistent degree of similarity to Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian, but shares many features equally with the rest of the Western Romance languages, specifically Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Catalan. The Romanian alphabet contains the same 26 letters of the standard Latin alphabet, as well as five additional ones (namely ă, â, î, ț, and ș), totalling 31. Romanian is spoken as a first language by 91.55% of the entire population, while Hungarian and Vlax Romani are spoken by 6.28% and 1.20% of the population, respectively. There are also 40,861 native speakers of Ukrainian (concentrated in some compact regions near the border, where they form local majorities), 17,101 native speakers of Turkish, 15,943 native speakers of German, and 14,414 native speakers of Russian living in Romania. According to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities. In localities with ethnic minorities of over 20%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education. Foreign citizens and stateless persons who live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language. English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools. In 2010, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie identified 4,756,100 French speakers in the country. According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31% of Romanians, French is spoken by 17%, and Italian and German, each by 7%. Romania is a secular state and has no state religion. An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians. At the country's 2021 census, 73.60% of respondents identified as Orthodox Christians, with 73.42% belonging to the Romanian Orthodox Church. Other denominations include Protestantism (6.22%), Roman Catholicism (3.89%), and Greek Catholicism (0.61%). From the remaining population 128,291 people belong to other Christian denominations or have another religion, which includes 58,347 Muslims (mostly of Turkish and Tatar ethnicity) and 2,708 Jewish (Jews once constituted 4% of the Romanian population—728,115 persons in the 1930 census). Additionally, 71,430 people are irreligious, 57,229 are atheist, 25,485 are agnostic, and 2,658,165 people chose to not declare their religion. The Romanian Orthodox Church is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Church in full communion with other Orthodox churches, with a Patriarch as its leader. It is the third-largest Eastern Orthodox Church in the world, and unlike other Orthodox churches, it functions within a Latin culture and uses a Romance liturgical language. Its canonical jurisdiction covers the territories of Romania and Moldova. Romania has the world's third-largest Eastern Orthodox population. Although 54.0% of the population lived in urban areas in 2011, this percentage has been declining since 1996. Counties with over 2⁄3 urban population are Hunedoara, Brașov and Constanța, while those with less than a third are Dâmbovița (30.06%) and Giurgiu and Teleorman. Bucharest is the capital and the largest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.7 million in 2021. Its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2 million, which are planned to be included into a metropolitan area up to 20 times the area of the city proper. Another 17 cities have a population of over 100,000, with Cluj-Napoca, Iași, Constanța and Timișoara of more than 250,000 inhabitants, and Craiova, Brașov and Galați with over 200,000 inhabitants. Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities. Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, the Romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism. In 2004, some 4.4 million individuals were enrolled in school. Of these, 650,000 were in kindergarten (three-six years), 3.11 million in primary and secondary level, and 650,000 in tertiary level (universities). In 2018, the adult literacy rate was 98.8%. Kindergarten is optional between three and five years. Since 2020, compulsory schooling starts at age 5 with the last year of kindergarten (grupa mare) and is compulsory until twelfth grade. Primary and secondary education is divided into 12 or 13 grades. There is also a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which prospered during the Communist regime. Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Iași, Babeș-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, University of Bucharest, and West University of Timișoara have been included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800. Romania ranks fifth in the all-time medal count at the International Mathematical Olympiad with 316 total medals, dating back to 1959. Ciprian Manolescu managed to write a perfect paper (42 points) for a gold medal more times than anybody else in the history of the competition, in 1995, 1996 and 1997. Romania has achieved the highest team score in the competition, after China, Russia, the United States and Hungary. Romania also ranks sixth in the all-time medal count at the International Olympiad in Informatics with 107 total medals, dating back to 1989. Healthcare in Romania is mainly provided by the public sector, which runs most hospitals and offers national health insurance to nearly all citizens. In 2021, healthcare costs were US$16. 7 billion, or US$2,385 per person, making up 5.69€ of GDP. Government spending is higher than in markets like Bulgaria but lower than Hungary. Spending is expected to rise by 7. US$5 billion (+37. 68%) from 2024 to 2028, reaching 27. US$3 billion by 2028. The Romanian National Institute of Statistics reports over 65,000 health units in Romania, with 53,000 in urban areas and 12,000 in rural areas. There are 543 hospitals, including 488 in urban and 55 in rural areas, along with 160 other hospital-like establishments. Nearly 50% of these are large facilities with over 100 beds, while 39% are small with fewer than 50 beds. The total number of inpatient beds is 135,085, allocated mainly to psychiatry, surgery, and internal medicine among other specialties. The topic of the origin of Romanian culture began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century among the Transylvanian School scholars. Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century, including: George Coșbuc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kogălniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae Bălcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creangă, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem Luceafărul. In the 20th century, a number of Romanian artists and writers achieved international acclaim, including: Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco, Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu, Eugène Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Brâncuși. Brâncuși has a sculptural ensemble in Târgu Jiu, while his sculpture Bird in Space, was auctioned in 2005 for $27.5 million. Romanian-born Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, while Banat Swabian writer Herta Müller received the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature. Prominent Romanian painters include: Nicolae Grigorescu, Ștefan Luchian, Ion Andreescu Nicolae Tonitza, and Theodor Aman. Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include: Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti, and especially George Enescu. The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honour of the 20th-century composer. Contemporary musicians like Angela Gheorghiu, Gheorghe Zamfir, Inna, Alexandra Stan, and many others have achieved various levels of international acclaim. From the late 2000s through the early 2010s, the Romanian popcorn music style had established itself in the international mainstream. At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers achieved third place in 2005 and 2010. In cinema, several movies of the Romanian New Wave have achieved international acclaim. At the Cannes Film Festival, The Death of Mr. Lazarescu by Cristi Puiu won the Prix Un Certain Regard in 2005, while 4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days by Cristian Mungiu won the festival's top prize, the Palme d'Or, in 2007. At the Berlin International Film Festival, Child's Pose by Călin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013. The list of World Heritage Sites includes six cultural sites located within Romania, including eight painted churches of northern Moldavia, eight wooden churches of Maramureș, seven villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the Horezu Monastery, and the Historic Centre of Sighișoara. The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture and the 2019 European Region of Gastronomy. Multiple castles exist in Romania, including the popular tourist attractions of Peleș Castle, Corvin Castle, and Bran Castle or "Dracula's Castle". There are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1 December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania. Winter holidays include the Christmas and New Year festivities during which various unique folklore dances and games are common: plugușorul, sorcova, ursul, and capra. The traditional Romanian dress that otherwise has largely fallen out of use during the 20th century, is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities, especially in rural areas. There are sacrifices of live pigs during Christmas and lambs during Easter that has required a special exemption from EU law after 2007. In the Easter, traditions such as painting the eggs are very common. On 1 March mărțișor gifting is featured, which is a tradition whereby females are gifted with a type of talisman that is given for good luck. Romanian cuisine has been influenced by Austrian and German cuisine (especially in the historical regions that had been formerly administered by the Habsburg monarchy), but also shares some similarities with other cuisines in the Balkan region such as the Greek, Bulgarian, or Serbian cuisine. Ciorbă includes a wide range of sour soups, while mititei, mămăligă (similar to polenta), and sarmale are featured commonly in main courses. Pork, chicken, and beef are the preferred types of meat, but lamb and fish are also quite popular. Certain traditional recipes are made in direct connection with the holidays: chiftele, tobă and tochitură at Christmas; drob, pască and cozonac at Easter and other Romanian holidays. Țuică is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70% alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75% of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world). Traditional alcoholic beverages also include wine, rachiu, palincă and vișinată, but beer consumption has increased dramatically over recent years. Football is the most popular sport in Romania with over 219,000 registered players as of 2018. The market for professional football in Romania is roughly €740 million according to UEFA. The governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Romania national football team played its first match in 1922 and is one of only four national teams to have taken part in the first three FIFA World Cups, the other three being Brazil, France, and Belgium. Overall, it has played in seven World Cups and had its most successful period during the 1990s, when it finished 6th at the 1994 FIFA World Cup, eventually being ranked 3rd by FIFA in 1997. The most successful club is Steaua București, who were the first Eastern European team to win the UEFA Champions League in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989. Dinamo București reached the UEFA Champions League semi-final in 1984 and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup semi-final in 1990. Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid București, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, Petrolul Ploiești, CFR Cluj, Astra Giurgiu, and Viitorul Constanța (the latter having recently merged with FCV Farul Constanța). Tennis is the second most popular sport. Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times in 1969, 1971 and 1972. The second most popular team sport is handball. The men's team won the handball world championship in 1961, 1964, 1970, 1974 making them the third most successful nation ever in the tournament. The women's team won the world championship in 1962 and have enjoyed more success than their male counterparts in recent years. In the club competition Romanian teams have won the EHF Champions League a total of three times, Steaua București won in 1968 as well as 1977 and Dinamo București won in 1965. In women's handball, powerhouse CSM București lifted the EHF Champions League trophy in 2016. Popular individual sports include combat sports, martial arts, and swimming. In professional boxing, Romania has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by governing bodies. Another popular combat sport is professional kickboxing, which has produced prominent practitioners including. Romania's 306 all-time Summer Olympics medals would rank 12th most among all countries, while its 89 gold medals would be 14th most. The 1984 Summer Olympics was their most successful run, where they won 53 medals in total, 20 of them gold, ultimately placing 2nd to the hosts United States in the medal rankings. Amongst countries who have never hosted the event themselves, they are second in the total number of medals earned. Gymnastics is the country's major medal-producing sport, 46°N 25°E﻿ / ﻿46°N 25°E﻿ / 46; 25
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2024_Romanian_presidential_election	Klaus Iohannis Independent Election results annulledKlaus Iohannis remained president until his resignation on 12 February 2025, after which Ilie Bolojan served as acting president Presidential elections were held in Romania on 24 November 2024. A second round was due to be held on 8 December 2024 as no candidate achieved an absolute majority in the first round. However, on 6 December 2024 the Constitutional Court annulled the election, alleging that a Russian influence operation had impacted the vote. This was the ninth presidential election held in post-revolution Romania. The result of the first round was a surprise, with independent nationalist candidate Călin Georgescu achieving a relative majority of votes, while the center-right politician Elena Lasconi finished second and also advanced to the runoff vote. Initially viewed as a minor candidate with little chance of victory, Georgescu quickly gained significant support through campaigning on non-traditional media outlets such as TikTok, receiving particular popularity among those disaffected with current Romanian politics, including youth, farmers, rural voters, and members of the working class. He was considered the front-runner in the race, and polling conducted after the first round of voting found him to be the most popular figure in the country's politics. Leading issues included corruption, LGBTQ rights, the role of Christianity in public life, and the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War. Georgescu, who has run on a nationalist platform, has criticised the National Coalition for Romania, a grand coalition of Romania's two largest parties, as corrupt. He has favoured increasing the role of Christianity in public life, promised to outlaw "LGBT propaganda", put forward plans towards partly nationalising important industries, and promoted neutrality and national sovereignty, as well as non-interventionism towards the Ukrainian War, without exiting NATO or the European Union. Lasconi supports secularism, further European integration, alignment with the United States and the West, and increasing military funding towards Ukraine. Georgescu's campaign has been endorsed by an assortment of Christian democratic, nationalist and agrarian political parties, including the Alliance for the Union of Romanians, S.O.S. Romania, Party of Young People, Romanian Socialist Party and the National Peasants' Party. Lasconi's campaign has been endorsed by the National Liberal Party, Democracy and Solidarity Party, Save Romania Union, and Renewing Romania's European Project, among several other parties. This was the first time since 2000 that a nationalist candidate made it into the second round instead of either the National Liberals or the now defunct Democratic Liberal Party. It was also the first time in the post-Communist period that the Social Democrats failed to reach the run-off. The aftermath of the first presidential vote was controversial and led Romania to the brink of a political crisis. President Iohannis, who chairs the country's Supreme Council of Defence, accused Georgescu's campaign of being supported by Russia. Following vote rigging allegations made by a minor candidate, the Constitutional Court of Romania ordered a recount, but ultimately decided to confirm the results of the first round on 2 December. On 6 December, the Constitutional Court reversed their decision and controversially annulled the first round of the election, after intelligence documents were declassified stating that Russia had run a coordinated online campaign to promote Georgescu. On 20 December, an investigation was published showing that the PNL, one of the governing parties, had paid for the TikTok campaigns that the Supreme Council of National Defence said were "identical" to the online campaign launched by Russia before the invasion of Ukraine and which led to the cancellation of the first round. Following consultations with various parliamentary groups, the government of Prime Minister Marcel Ciolacu announced on 4 July 2024 that presidential elections would take place later that year on 24 November for a first round and 8 December for a second round. It also set parliamentary elections for 1 December. Prior to this, there was a speculation according to which the forthcoming Romanian presidential elections might have occurred earlier than to term, in the event that incumbent President Klaus Iohannis would have been nominated as Secretary General of NATO and that he would have accepted the nomination in the meantime, then the election would have likely been called earlier than planned. This ultimately did not come to pass, as Dutch former Prime Minister Mark Rutte was chosen to succeed the incumbent Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg. President Klaus Iohannis was not eligible for another candidacy, therefore the party sought another suitable candidate. Former Prime Minister and former PNL president Ludovic Orban stated in Tecuci, Galați County, on 22 May 2021, that he did not "rule out" a candidacy in 2024. On 25 June 2021, then-Prime Minister Florin Cîțu stated in Piatra Neamț that he is "currently not considering" a presidential candidacy. Furthermore, fellow party leaders considered proposing Iohannis as Prime Minister after he ceases to be president. On 15 September 2024, Nicolae Ciucă, who was Prime Minister from 2021 to 2023, was formally designated as the PNL candidate for the presidency of Romania. In a televised talk show on 24 April 2021, the party leader Marcel Ciolacu stated that it would be "very likely" that the party president (himself, at that time) would not run for president in 2024. Asked about considering a presidential candidacy, member of the Chamber of Deputies, Alexandru Rafila vaguely answered on 4 July 2021 "never say never" but underlined that running for president is "definitely not my goal". In another televised talk show, former Prime Minister Sorin Grindeanu stated that the party is "going for the win" in all elections scheduled for 2024 (legislative, local, European Parliament, and presidential), and he "did not rule out" that Mircea Geoană could be again the party's presidential candidate. Geoană ran for president in 2009 but narrowly lost in the second round to Traian Băsescu, who was then re-elected for a second and final term. Speculations were proven clear that Geoană was running for the presidency in 2024 but did not receive PSD support as it was initially believed according to incumbent PSD president Marcel Ciolacu. On 26 August 2024, at the two-day PSD Congress, Ciolacu was officially designated as the party's presidential candidate. Former 2019 candidate and party co-president Dan Barna stated in several interviews in April 2021 that his candidacy was "not ruled out" and a "real scenario". Party co-president Dacian Cioloș stated in an interview on 18 February 2021 that he was also considering a potential candidacy. On 1 October 2021, Cioloș stated that his objective was to win the 2024 presidential election. On 26 June 2024, at the two-day USR Congress, Elena Lasconi, the newly elected party president, was officially designated as the party's presidential candidate. Cristian Diaconescu, then newly elected president of the party in early 2021, was designated the party's presidential candidate; however, some analysts believed that Mihail Neamțu, a current member of the PMP, might run instead, either as an independent (with PMP support) or as a candidate from another party. On 23 March 2022, Cristian Diaconescu was excluded from the party by the new leadership, thus losing his presidential candidate status previously granted by the PMP. Diaconescu subsequently filed to run as an independent candidate. On 28 June 2022, former Prime Minister, former PNL president, and current Force of the Right (FD) leader Ludovic Orban announced that he would run for president in 2024, also stating that he doesn't want to support any other candidate, being tremendously disappointed by the incumbent Klaus Iohannis. Orban was the second former PNL president to run for the Romanian presidency supported by a breakaway faction of the PNL after Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu (Prime Minister between 2004 and 2008) who ran on behalf of the Liberal Reformist Party (PLR; one of the predecessors of the Romanian ALDE founded in 2015 through a merger with the Conservative Party (PC) and subsequently absorbed by the PNL in March 2022) in 2014, during that year's presidential election. On 18 November 2024, during a live TV debate, Ludovic Orban announced his withdrawal from the presidential race and his endorsement to Elena Lasconi, the USR candidate. His late withdrawal kept his name on the ballot and any vote received would still be counted as his. Technically, he continued campaigning but delivered messages of endorsement for Lasconi. PER announced on 28 October 2024 its endorsement for Cristian Diaconescu. The Alliance for the Union of Romanians nominated its leader George Simion. The Constitutional Court of Romania (CCR) notably disqualified far-right and pro-Russia S.O.S. Romania candidate Diana Șoșoacă from running, ruling that her public statements and conduct "systematically" violate the country's constitutional foundation of membership in Euro-Atlantic structures. In response, Șoșoacă claimed "this proves the Americans, Israelis and the European Union have plotted to rig the Romanian election before it has begun". The court's ruling, which was split 5–2 along party lines, was criticised by some for being politically motivated, undemocratic and a result of corruption, including by the PNL, which ended its governing coalition with the PSD as a result of the decision. PNL president Nicolae Ciucă claimed the court's decision showed the involvement of the PSD and endangers democracy in Romania, while PSD president Marcel Ciolacu reacted by saying that the Court should be reformed. Călin Georgescu, a Romanian nationalist who is a former member of the AUR, ran as an independent. He primarily conducted his campaigns through TikTok. These candidates were placed on the first and the second place in the first round, but none of them reached at least 50% of the votes. Thus, they qualified for the second round, to be held on 8 December 2024. The first round was later annulled by the Constitutional Court of Romania, invalidating this second round. These candidates' bids were validated by the Central Electoral Bureau (BEC). Some candidacies were challenged by the CCR, but rejected those claims. Excludes a valid candidate that withdrew during the electoral campaign and announced his endorsement to another candidate, while his name remained on the ballot. These individuals were part of the race in some way and their plans stopped. Some failed to file their bid to BEC, withdrew from the race, or recanted their interest in the presidential office. Here are also included candidates who are no longer in the race due to their bid being rejected by BEC, or whose bid or candidacy were legally barred by the CCR, and a candidate that withdrew during the electoral campaign and announced his endorsement to another candidate, while his name remained on the ballot. These individuals have been the subject of speculation, but have publicly denied their interest in running for president. Here are also included individuals legally barred from running for president. Former presidential elections:2004: 40.9% (1st place, 1st round), 48.77% (2nd place, 2nd round) The role of Christianity and patriotism in Romanian public life has become a leading issue in the campaign. Often both supported and mocked as "The TikTok Messiah" for his religious nationalist messaging and use of the app TikTok, Georgescu has gained appeal among religious Romanians, appealing to natalism, family values, patriotism, and traditionalism. Both Călin Georgescu and Elena Lasconi have criticised corruption in Romania, which has become central to their appeal. Georgescu has accused the mainstream political parties, particularly the National Coalition for Romania between the center-left Social Democratic Party and the center-right National Liberal Party, of fostering corruption. Lasconi favours Romania closely aligning with the United States, European Union, and NATO, while opposing Russia, while Georgescu has stated that he favours Romania's geopolitical non-alignment between the two power blocs. Georgescu has also pledged to end military aid to Ukraine. Following the first round, Lasconi said that Romania was in "a historical confrontation between preserving Romania's young democracy ... and those who want to return Romania to the Russian sphere of influence". She also accused Georgescu of being an isolationist and an "open admirer of Vladimir Putin". Georgescu denied being an extremist or a fascist and said that he is "completely dedicated to the Romanian people", adding: "We remain directly linked to European values, but we must find our (own) values." LGBTQ rights are expected to be a major issue in the campaign. In the second round of the campaign, LGBTQ rights organizations have made strong endorsements for Lasconi, despite her past comments, while Georgescu explicitly rejects LGBTQ rights movements. Lasconi's positions have become significantly favourable towards LGBTQ rights. Earlier in 2023, Lasconi stated that she would have voted "Yes" during the failed referendum on the constitutional prohibition of same-sex unions. Her daughter, Oana, subsequently denounced her as a "homophobe" and stated that she was "shocked and disgusted" at her mother. Lasconi immediately retracted this position, stated that she does not oppose civil unions or (in the distant future) marriage for LGBTQ couples, while stating that her party remains open for individuals who are gender or sexual minorities, and that the party is open to all, "be they ... atheists [or] LGBTQ individuals". The debates started on 28 October 2024, three days after the start of the campaign. The last first round debate was broadcast on 21 November 2024, 8:30 hours before the electoral campaign ended. There had been 38 broadcast debates: 30 televised, six on the radio and three online. The broadcasters were: The following is a table of participating candidates in each debate: The table below lists the political parties and other political organizations that supported any of the candidates in the first and second rounds of the presidential election. Recently reelected Moldovan president Maia Sandu, who is also a Romanian citizen, announced her support for Elena Lasconi in the second round of the election. Georgian president Salome Zourabichvili also expressed support for Lasconi, just like French President Emmanuel Macron. Răzvan Burleanu, the president of the Romanian Football Federation, urged fans to support "European values". The Romanian Orthodox Church said it supported Romania's membership in the European Union. The results of the first round of voting were widely described as a shock, with both second round contenders Călin Georgescu and Elena Lasconi outperforming polling expectations. The underwhelming performance of Prime Minister Marcel Ciolacu led to the first presidential election in the history of post-communist Romania in which the Social Democratic candidate did not make it to the second round of voting. The National Liberals marked their worst ever result in a presidential race, as Nicolae Ciucă ended up in fifth place with 8.79% of the vote. Right-wing populist George Simion also registered a weak result, after it was widely speculated he would advance to the second round in December. Turnout was higher than in 2019, with 9,465,257 Romanians showing up to the polls, representing 52.56% of the eligible electorate. After failing to advance to the runoff, Marcel Ciolacu announced his resignation as leader of the Social Democratic Party on 25 November; however, he will remain the Prime Minister until a new government is formed following parliamentary elections on 1 December. Nicolae Ciucă also resigned as leader of the National Liberal Party after failing to advance to the runoff. Amid discussion over the role of social media in Călin Georgescu's strong showing, Ciolacu also called for funding for Georgescu's campaign on TikTok to be reviewed, while MEP and Renew Europe leader Valérie Hayer called on TikTok's CEO to answer questions about the platform's role in the election before the European Parliament, citing the Digital Services Act. The National Audiovisual Council of Romania also called for the European Commission to investigate TikTok's role in the election, while the national telecommunications regulator Ancom called for TikTok to be suspended as part of an investigation into electoral manipulation. Romanian president Klaus Iohannis also accused TikTok of failing to mark Georgescu's account as that of a political candidate. TikTok subsequently denied favouring Georgescu. Protests also broke out against Georgescu in Bucharest and several other cities in Romania. An analysis by the Romanian news outlet G4 Media found that Georgescu mounted a "propaganda machine" using thousands of supposed "volunteers" to spread his campaign messaging, adding that those involved received pre-made materials on Telegram that could readily be posted as comments on TikTok and other platforms. TikTok executives said that they had taken down several networks engaged in election interference in Romania. On 27 November, two minor candidates, Sebastian Constantin Popescu and Cristian Terheș submitted requests to the Constitutional Court of Romania to annul the results of the first round of the election. On 28 November, the court ruled unanimously to recount all ballots cast in the first round, with a decision on whether to annul the results expected on 2 December. In their appeals, Terheș accused the USR of violating election law by campaigning among diaspora voters on polling day and alleged that votes cast for Ludovic Orban had been transferred to Elena Lasconi. Popescu accused Georgescu, who declared zero campaign spending, of failing to disclose financing linked to TikTok. The Central Election Bureau later said that scanned reports were due to be delivered by 1 December and the original ballots by 3 December. Additionally, the Supreme Council of National Defence convened and called for an investigation into alleged attacks on the electoral infrastructure and suspicions of illegal campaigning by Călin Georgescu. Georgescu denied the accusations against him, while Lasconi criticised the recount and called on the Central Election Bureau to handle the process "wisely". In November 2024, Călin Georgescu spoke with Israeli Diaspora Affairs Minister Amichai Chikli. The Romanian Ambassador to Israel accused Israel of interfering in the 2024 Romanian presidential election in favour of Georgescu. On 2 December, the Constitutional Court ruled unanimously to confirm the first round results and upheld the organisation of the runoff on 8 December between Georgescu and Lasconi; however, the Court reversed its decision on 6 December and annulled the election results after President Iohannis allowed the declassification of information in the Supreme Council of National Defence. The Romanian Service of Information also declared that Georgescu said he had a "Zero lei electoral campaign budget", but subsequent investigations revealed an undeclared donation of up to €1,000,000 from third parties. This prompted the Court to annul the election results. The annulment was condemned by both Georgescu and Lasconi, with Georgescu describing the court's verdict as a "formalised coup d'état", and Lasconi calling it "illegal [and] immoral" and stating that it "crushes the very essence of democracy". Fourth-placed George Simion also called the verdict a "coup d'état in full swing" but urged against street protests. Third-placed Marcel Ciolacu called the annulment "the only correct decision". President Iohannis also said the court's decision was legitimate and should be respected, adding that he would remain in office until a successor is inaugurated. Russian state interference in the election was widely reported, including state-sponsored cyberattacks, and the annulment was described as "an extraordinary step" by The Washington Post. The annulment also forced a halt to advanced voting in 951 overseas polling stations for the diaspora that had opened on 6 December, after approximately 50,000 Romanians had cast ballots. On 7 December, prosecutors searched properties across the country in an investigation into the financing of a candidate's campaign, with investigators saying money laundering was used to fund the campaign. Although the candidate's name was not revealed, Georgescu and his campaign were reportedly the target of the searches. On the day of the cancelled runoff, Georgescu and around 100 of his supporters held a protest outside a polling station in Bucharest demanding that the election be held. An online petition calling for free elections was also launched by the AUR, which supported Georgescu. Following the annulment of the presidential election, the new government formed after the 2024 Romanian parliamentary election on 1 December is expected to set new dates for a presidential vote. Ilie Bolojan, president of the PNL, said the rerun will likely occur either before Easter in late March or early April, or after Easter in May. On 17 December, the European Commission announced an investigation into TikTok over interference in the elections. On 21 December, the political magazine Politico Europe reported that the pro-European PNL had financed a general political campaign, the hashtags of which were then used to promote Georgescu. On 12 January 2025, tens of thousands of people protested in Bucharest against the annulment of the election. Some Romanian politicians supported Georgescu's participation in the new presidential elections in May 2025. Former liberal leader Crin Antonescu said: "It is not just about [Georgescu] or his statements but about a broader theme — society's trust in the fairness and reliability of the democratic system, particularly elections." On 21 January, the European Court of Human Rights rejected an appeal by Georgescu to reverse the annulment, saying that it did not have jurisdiction over the case. Six days later, the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe published an "Urgent Report on the cancellation of election results by Constitutional Courts", which had been commissioned by the Council of Europe President, Theodoros Rousopoulos, on 13 December 2024. At the 2025 Munich Security Conference US Vice President JD Vance criticised the annulment, stating that "If your democracy can be destroyed with a few $100,000 of digital advertising from a foreign country, then it wasn't very strong to begin with". He said that the Romanian courts had decided to annul the elections under pressure from "flimsy suspicions of an intelligence agency and enormous pressure from its continental neighbors" (referring to the Romanian Intelligence Service). On 24 April 2025, a judge of the Ploiești Court of Appeals overturned and suspended the Constitutional Court's ruling that had annulled the election. The Central Electoral Bureau subsequently stated that the 2025 election, due on 4 May, would continue as normal. The Prosecutor's Office attached to the Ploiești Court of Appeals appealed the decision, and the Superior Council of Magistracy referred the judge for potential disciplinary misconduct. In the first round of the 2025 presidential election, Simion won 41 per cent of the vote in the first round on 4 May, with Nicușor Dan defeating him 53.6%–46.4% in the runoff on 18 May. Dan's presidency began on 26 May 2025. Debates may be broadcast on radio, television, or the internet. Candidates may show up in person or participate in the debate via telephone or video streaming for the entire debate time. Candidates who left the debate before 10% of the debate time elapsed (after a few words or several minutes) are considered absentees and their leaving is noted as such. In this particular situation (if it will occur), the debate is considered a valid one, because at least two candidates were present at its beginning. Candidates who left before the debate's ending are considered present, with their particular situation noted as such. Re-runs or syndication are not counted as different debates.
